UART(Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter)

UART Key Points:

A Universal Asynchronous Receiver and Transmitter (UART) is a Digital Circuit that sends Parallel Data through a Serial Line.

Main purpose of UART is to Transmit and Receive Serial Data.

Two UARTs Communicate Directly in UART Communication System.



Uart Trasmits data Asynchronously, which means there is no clock signals to synchronize the output bits from the transmitting UART to the Sampling of bits by the receiving UART



UART(Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmit

UART Operating Principle:

Transmitting UART converts the received parallel data (eg. from CPU, Memory) into serial form.

The UART Transmitter adds START and STOP bits to the Data Packets being transferred.

The Data Packet is then Serially Transferred to Receiving UART

These bits defines the Start and Stop of the Data Packet, So the receiving UART knows when to sample the Data or Start reading the bits 

When the receiving UART detects a Start bit, it starts to read the incoming bits at a specific frequency know as the Baud Rate.

The receiving device then removes the START bit, Parity bit and Stop bit, and converts the serial data into parallel form (which can be read by CPU)

Baud Rate is the measure of the speed of the data transferred, expressed in Bits Per Second (BPS).

.Both Tx and Rx UART should operate at about the same baud rate

Only One Master and One Slave device can participate in UART Serial Communication.



UART(Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter)

1 Start Bit

5 to 8 Data Bits

0 or 1 Parity Bit

ce

1 or 2 Stop Bits

Figure #2: UART Data Frame

Each UART Packet Contains 1 START bit, 5 to 8 DATA bits (depending on the UART), an optional PARITY bit and 1 or 2 STOP bits



UART(Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitte

In UART, the Data Frame is considered as a combination of four basic components namely

1) START Bit: High to low-level voltage change represents the start of data transmission 

2) INPUT Data: Data stored in the form of bits

3) PARITY Bit: It is used to evaluate the fault in received data

4) STOP Bit: Terminates data transfer



UART(Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter

Advantages of UART Communication:

1) Fewer Signals (2)

2) No Clock Signals

3) Error Detection Using Parity Bit



UART(Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmi

Dis-advantages of UART Communication:

1) Serial Communication (Less Throughput)

2) Data Limit (Limited Data Frame)

3) Only One Master and Slave Device is Supported

4) Both End Should have Similar Data Transfer Setting



UART(Universal Asynchronous Receiver Transmitter)

Oversampling:

The receiver of the UART peripheral implements different user-configurable oversampling techniques for data recovery by discriminating between the valid incoming data and noise.

the oversampling technique talks about the sampling frequency of the UART peripheral's receive engine to recover the data coming on the Rx line of the UART.
